doc: Add Memfault user guide (#9760)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/ug_memfault.rst

.. _ug_memfault:

Memfault integration
####################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

`Memfault`_ is a cloud based web application with |NCS| SDK compatibility that monitors devices and allows you to debug issues remotely.

> Memfault provides |NCS| with the following features:

Author: After offline discussion with @umapraseeda , rephrased the sentence.

* `Remote debugging <Memfault debugging_>`_ - Memfault issues can be efficiently resolved with automatic detection, alerts, deduplication, and actionable insights sent through the cloud.
* `Continuous monitoring <Memfault monitoring_>`_ - Monitors device and fleet-level metrics like connectivity and low power state in real-time dashboards.

>   There are 15 prepopulated metrics shown for your devices.

Reviewer: Maybe rephrase this to not reference the number of prepoulated metrics (`15`). To reduce maintainance between versions.

     You can get your ``project key`` here to set in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` Kconfig option.
     After registration, you can connect up to 100 devices for free.

Solution architecture
*********************

The SDK provides functionality to collect debug information from your devices in the form of coredumps, error traces, metrics, logs, and more.
Memfault saves the data to a non-volatile storage, after which it is broken into chunks and forwarded to Memfault's cloud solution for further analysis.
Communication with the Memfault Cloud is handled by APIs available in `Memfault-SDK`_, while the integration code of the SDK in |NCS| provides some additional functionality.
The Memfault cloud reassembles the data before analyzing and de-duplicates the data.
The overall fleet health of the issues can be examined through the dashboard of the Memfault web application.
See the `Memfault MCU Guide`_ for more information.

.. figure:: /images/Memfault_architecture.svg
   :alt: Memfault Solution architecture

   Memfault Solution architecture

.. _using_memfault:

Integration overview
********************

> The SDK is part of the West manifest in |NCS| and is automatically downloaded when running ``west update``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SDK version is included in the `west manifest file`_ in |NCS| and is automatically downloaded when running ``west update``.
```

By default, it is downloaded to ``<nRF Connect SDK path>/modules/memfault-firmware-sdk/``.

The Memfault integration in the |NCS| consists of the following steps:

1. :ref:`Configuring Memfault <ug_memfault_config>`
#. :ref:`ug_memfault_error`
#. :ref:`ug_memfault_metrics`

.. _ug_memfault_config:

Configuring Memfault
====================

Complete the following steps to integrate Memfault into your project:

1. Add the following Kconfig option in your :file:`prj.conf` file:

   .. code-block:: console

      CONFIG_MEMFAULT=y
      CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY=""

   The APIs in the Memfault SDK can then be linked into your application.
   You can get your project key after signing up with Memfault.

>    The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` option is located in the :file:`../overlay-memfault.conf` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` Kconfig option is located in the :file:`../overlay-memfault.conf` file.
```

>    The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` Kconfig option is located in the :file:`../overlay-memfault.conf` file.

Reviewer: Cannot find any other reference to `overlay-memfault.conf` other than in the ATv2 app. If this is the case this line needs to be removed if the docs are intended to be generic.

> #. Create a new folder in your project called :file:`config` and add the following three files:

Reviewer 3: This point is optional if `CONFIG_MEMFAULT_USER_CONFIG_ENABLE` is disabled, and will also not be needed if if it is enabled and `CONFIG_MEMFAULT_USER_CONFIG_SILENT_FAIL` is enabled (this is the default situation).

In short, I think it should be mentioned that this point may be optional depending on configuration.

Author: I have re-structured the "Configuring Memfault" section and added a sub-section "Configuration files" that covers the above points. 
Please check.

>     * :file:`memfault_platform_config.h` - Sets Memfault SDK configurations that are not covered by Kconfig options.
>     * :file:`memfault_metrics_heartbeat_config.def` - Defines application-specific metrics.
>     * :file:`memfault_trace_reason_user_config.def` - Defines application-specific trace reasons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * :file:`memfault_platform_config.h` - Sets Memfault SDK configurations that are not covered by Kconfig options.
   * :file:`memfault_metrics_heartbeat_config.def` - Defines application-specific metrics.
   * :file:`memfault_trace_reason_user_config.def` - Defines application-specific trace reasons.
```

>    Memfault SDK requires these three files in the include path during the build process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Memfault SDK requires the three files in the include path during the build process.
```

> #. Add the following in the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file to have these configuration files in the include path:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Add the following code in the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file to have these configuration files in the include path:
```

> #. Add the following code in the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file to have these configuration files in the include path:

Reviewer 3: This point is only needed if the point above is required

   .. code-block:: console

      zephyr_include_directories(config)

See the `Memfault nRF Connect SDK integration guide`_ documentation for more details.

.. note::
   In the :ref:`memfault_sample` sample folder, the aforementioned Memfault configurations are already included.

>    You must just add your project key in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` Kconfig option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Make sure to add your project key in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` Kconfig option.
```

You can also add configuration using multiple overlay files, ``-DOVERLAY_CONFIG`` must be set to a list of overlay configurations.

> Following is an example of the overlay details for Memfault integration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the following example on how to set an overlay configuration for Memfault integration:
```

.. code-block:: console

   west build -b nrf9160dk_nrf9160_ns -- -DOVERLAY_CONFIG=overlay-memfault.conf

.. _ug_memfault_error:

Error Tracking
==============

Memfault captures all faults that happen at any time.
The crash data is sent to the Memfault cloud for further inspection and analysis.
The faults are tracked using the following methods.

> Reboot Reason Tracking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reboot reason tracking
```

----------------------

The device might reboot due to a crash, a brownout, or a firmware update.
The reboot events for each device are captured and displayed in the Memfault UI.

See `Memfault: Reboot tracking`_ for detailed documentation.

> Error Tracking with Trace Events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Error tracking with trace events
```

--------------------------------

> Trace event method is used if you want to track errors without capturing full coredump traces (that use less storage) and keeping the device up and running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the trace event method if you want to track errors without capturing full coredump traces (that use less storage) and keep the device up and running.
```

The following samples implement a user-defined trace reason for demonstration purposes.

* :ref:`memfault_sample`
* :ref:`peripheral_mds`

Read the **Error Tracking with trace events** section of these sample documents for more information.

See `Memfault: Error Tracking with Trace Events`_ for detailed documentation.

> Faults are captured and displayed on the **Issues** page of Memfault UI.

Reviewer 3: It's useful that we are this specific in where to find stuff on Memfault's UI, we just need to be sure to keep it up to date if they changw things

> RAM-backed stack dump Collection (Coredumps)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RAM-backed stack dump collection (Coredumps)
```

--------------------------------------------

The coredumps can be triggered to track the fault.
The **Coredumps** section of the following sample documents provides more information:

* :ref:`memfault_sample`
* :ref:`peripheral_mds`

See `Memfault: Coredumps`_ for detailed documentation.
Faults are captured and displayed on the **Issues** page of the Memfault UI.

.. _ug_memfault_metrics:

Collecting Metrics
==================

> The Memfault collects data from each device and visualizes it in a graph.

Reviewer 3: Looks like `SDK` is missing, or if not `The` should probably be removed

The Memfault SDK integration layer in |NCS| adds the system property metrics.
There are also some metrics specific to |NCS|.
See **Metrics** section of the following sample documents for more information:

* :ref:`memfault_sample`
* :ref:`peripheral_mds`

See `Memfault: Collecting Device Metrics`_ for detailed documentation.

Configuration options
=====================

There are different configuration options defined for the Memfault SDK in |NCS|.
The configuration options are defined both in `Memfault-SDK`_ and in the integration layer, which integrates the SDK into |NCS|.

> The configuration options of the integration layer are in ``modules/memfault/Kconfig``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration options of the integration layer are in :file:`modules/memfault/Kconfig`.
```

See the Configuration section of the following library documents for different Memfault SDK configuration options defined in |NCS|:

* :ref:`mod_memfault`
* :ref:`peripheral_mds`

Applications and samples
************************

The following application uses the Memfault integration in |NCS|:

* :ref:`asset_tracker_v2` - The debug module of :ref:`asset_tracker_v2` uses `Memfault SDK`_ to track |NCS| specific metrics such as LTE and stack metrics.

>   See :ref:`asset_tracker_v2_debug_module` documentation for more details.

Reviewer 3: It could be usefult to mention that the application shows how to use Memfault on a custom transport too, ie not only using Memfault's own HTTPS

Author: Had a offline chat with Jan tore, and we agreed to cover this in a separate PR.

> The following sample demonstrates the Memfault integration in |NCS|:

Reviewer 3: `... samples demonstrate ...`

> * :ref:`peripheral_mds` - This sample has an implementation of the MDS.

Reviewer 3: I'd write `MDS` without abbreviation here, I think

     After registration, you can connect up to 100 devices for free.

Solution architecture
*********************

The SDK provides functionality to collect debug information from your devices in the form of coredumps, error traces, metrics, logs, and more.
Memfault saves the data to a configurable storage, after which it is broken into chunks and forwarded at intervals or application-specific times to Memfault's cloud solution for further analysis.
Communication with the Memfault Cloud is handled by APIs available in `Memfault-SDK`_, while the integration code of the SDK in |NCS| provides some additional functionality.
The Memfault cloud reassembles the data before analyzing and deduplicates the data.
The overall fleet health of the issues can be examined through the dashboard of the Memfault web application.
See the `Memfault MCU Guide`_ for more information.

.. figure:: /images/Memfault_architecture.svg
   :alt: Memfault Solution architecture

   Memfault Solution architecture

.. _using_memfault:

Integration overview
********************

The SDK version is included in the `west manifest file`_ in |NCS| and is automatically downloaded when running ``west update``.

> By default, it is downloaded to ``nRF/modules/memfault-firmware-sdk/``.

Reviewer 3: The current path (`nrf/modules/memfault-firmware-sdk/`) is where the NCS integration resides, ie the code that we in Nordic provide to integrate Memfault. 
The Memfault SDK is by default downloaded by west to `ncs/modules/lib/memfault-firmware-sdk/`

Complete the following steps to integrate Memfault into |NCS|:

1. :ref:`Configure Memfault <ug_memfault_config>`
#. :ref:`Track errors <ug_memfault_error>`
#. :ref:`Collect metrices <ug_memfault_metrics>`

.. _ug_memfault_config:

Configuring Memfault
====================

To include Memfault in your build, add the following Kconfig option in your :file:`prj.conf` file:

.. code-block:: console

   CONFIG_MEMFAULT=y
   CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY=""

The APIs in the Memfault SDK can then be linked into your application.
You can get your project key after signing up with Memfault.

.. note::
   In the :ref:`memfault_sample` sample folder, the aforementioned Memfault configurations are already included.
   Make sure to add your project key in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` Kconfig option.

> You can also add configuration using multiple overlay files, ``-DOVERLAY_CONFIG`` must be set to a list of overlay configurations.
> See the following example on how to set an overlay configuration for Memfault integration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also add the configurations using a Kconfig configuration fragment file.
See the following example on how to set an overlay configuration for Memfault integration:
```

Reviewer 3: I know we use overlay a lot for these files, but they're now calles Kconfig configuration fragment files according to this one: https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.2.0/develop/application/index.html#important-build-system-variables

To add the user configuration files, create a new folder in your project called :file:`config` and add the following three files:

* :file:`memfault_platform_config.h` - Sets Memfault SDK configurations that are not covered by Kconfig options.
* :file:`memfault_metrics_heartbeat_config.def` - Defines application-specific metrics.
* :file:`memfault_trace_reason_user_config.def` - Defines application-specific trace reasons.

Add the following code in the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file to have these configuration files in the include path:

.. code-block:: console

   zephyr_include_directories(config)

See the `Memfault nRF Connect SDK integration guide`_ documentation for more details.

.. _ug_memfault_error:

Error Tracking
==============

Memfault captures all faults that happen at any time.
The crash data is sent to the Memfault cloud for further inspection and analysis.
The faults are tracked using the following methods.

Reboot reason tracking
----------------------

The device might reboot due to a crash, a brownout, or a firmware update.

> The reboot events for each device are captured and displayed in the Memfault UI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The reboot events for each device are captured and displayed in the Memfault UI along with the recorded reboot reason.
```
